---
layout: post
title: Failure
description: Dealing with failure
noindex: true
---
Failure is not a pleasant subject matter to talk about or experience. There are both
internal and external challenges that occur when one fails at something. Either way it
can have an incredible impact on an individual. However, a culture without failure
is a culture without innovation and learning, which is the death-knell for any team. You may have
heard the concepts of “fail-fast” or “shift-left” to reduce risk, which is true,
but the main benefit of failures is that they are the gift of iterative learning
opportunities. I’ve previously about how failure influenced my journey towards DevOps, and how a culture
that embraces failure is an opportunity to learn and reach new heights.

**This play will provide a few techniques in dealing with failure from three
perspectives:**

1.  **Internal Plays**

2.  **External Plays**

3.  **Culture and team Plays**

>   Pro tip: One of the key differences in Product Teams versus Project teams is
>   that long-lived Product teams learn as they grow over a long period of
>   time….



When to use it:
---------------

-   At all times with all teams, in all stages of capability and maturity
    levels.

Expected outcomes:
------------------

-   An individual and team building a continue around learning will be at their
    best.

How to execute it:
------------------

-   Recommend Time: 30 minutes to 1.5 hours to internalize the concept and
    techniques

-   Recommended update: Review as needed

### Failure play:

**Internal plays**

A failure typically triggers a set of emotions. These can and will run the full
gamut, however there are two dangerous internally controlled behaviors that
needs to be challenged.

1.  Lack of grit or the lack of the ability to rebound and preserve in the face
    of failure.

2.  Blaming others for the failure.

**Dealing with a lack of grit (or similarly withdrawing, pouting, feeling
victimized, beating yourself up)**

In this
[article](Identifying%20grit%20during%20short%20meetings%20with%20players%20at%20the%20Senior%20Bowl%20or%20the%20combine%20is%20difficult.%20But%20she%20has%20some%20ideas.%20For%20example,%20she%20suggested%20showing%20the%20players%20film%20of%20their%20worst%20plays%20and%20seeing%20how%20they%20reacted.),
the Seattle Seahawks, a championship winning American football team used a
process to identify players with grit,

>   “Identifying grit during short meetings with American football players at the Senior Bowl or
>   the combine is difficult…[however showing the players videos of their
>   failures and] See whether they focus on their mistakes and what they can
>   learn from them, or do they get defensive and not want to look at the film
>   of their mistakes?"

While some folks may start with grit, it is also something from which you can grow.
You can choose to be defensive or to learn from your mistakes. The key here is
to adopt the “growth mindset” next time. Here are some additional techniques:

1.  Think in terms of making real small steps towards getting better. When
    hearing [Alison Levine](http://www.alisonlevine.com/expeditions/), one of a
    handful of people in the world to complete the Adventure Grand Slam
    (climbing the seven summits and skiing to both the north and south poles)
    speak, she mentions that on the toughest climb in Everest, you can only take
    a single step every 30 odd seconds when near the top due to lack of oxygen.
    It can take hours to go 30 yards. She focuses on making just the next step.
    You can do the same.

2.  Use positive language associated with a growth mindset, such as “I am not
    good at this…yet, or Today’s effort is worth tomorrows reward.” I know we
    can all get better at this.

3.  Adopt non-deterministic thinking. A won’t always cause B in the real-world.
    What other situations or outcomes might exist? What were other relative
    outcomes and how could I have done things differently?

4.  And perhaps most importantly – constantly ask yourself, “what did I learn
    from this failure?”

**Dealing with the tendency to blame others:**

Take a look at this play about [stop blaming
others](https://github.wdf.sap.corp/IT-Agile-DevOps-CC/Playbooks/blob/master/AgilePlaybook/Building_a_team/My%20Mindset/stop_blaming_start_sharing.md).
A few points to remember:

1.  Blaming is often an “emotional” replacement of a different feeling. It could
    be embarrassment, the desire to protect one’s ego, self-image and esteem or
    many others. Blaming keeps us from being open to problem solving, making
    changes or addressing the reality of the situation. Try to open up to your
    hidden feelings of what you want out of the situation and understand the
    core emotions. You may want to also use the technique, “How would I feel if
    there is no one to blame? What is difficult for me about addressing that
    about that feeling?”

2.  Pay attention to when you when you feel this way. Similar to
mindfulness
    don’t judge the feeling to blame, but also don’t dwell. Return to the
    moment.

3.  Don’t be too hard on yourself and remember that failure is not failure if
    something is learned from it.

**External plays**

In addition to dealing with your internal behaviors, you may also experience
behaviors of conflict from external parties that cause additional stress,
anxiety, and lead to additional internal misbehaviors. This may include poor
behaviors such as being singled out for failure and humiliated, receiving harsh
criticism, being reprimanded privately or publicly, and even becoming an outcast
to the group. They could also include constructive feedback, joint problem
solving, and inquiries into learning opportunities as well.

Unfortunately, we cannot control the behavior of others, and as Einstein said, “If
people are good only because they fear punishment, and hope for reward, then we
are a sorry lot indeed.” The play here is to try to reinforce the culture and
behaviors we are trying to achieve, which include learning to experiment with
the safety to fail and the opportunity to learn (not just to avoid future
punishment).

Below are some techniques that may help you weather the bad moments, embrace the
good, and then engage in joint problem solving/learning and holding each other
accountable to the norms and behaviors of the culture we are trying to build.


It’s worthwhile to remember in the culture we are trying to create, **“failure
causes inquiry”, “failures are treated primarily as opportunities to improve the
system”, “Responsibilities are shared”, and “Messengers are not punished when
they deliver news of a failure.”** Also, with the healthcheck, it’s useful to
remember that a **fear of conflict**, **a lack of commitment, avoidance of
accountability, and inattention to achieving the group results** are key
dysfunctions of a team.

So, when faced with an external conflict regarding failure, each person will
have to choose the tool and technique best suited for them and the situation.
When faced with failure, some tools may include: (and not mutually exclusive)

1.  Listen with empathy to defuse the other person’s emotions before engaging in solutioning. Even
    showing an understanding of the anger by non-committal terms such as
    ,”uh-huh”, and “I see” are useful statement to move beyond the emotional
    period.

2.  Using supportive confrontation to help channel the discussion towards joint solutioning. Both of these
    statements are useful including:

    1.  When you \_*\_ (behavior), I feel \_*\_____\_ (insert feeling)

    2.  Your \_**\___\_ behavior is not meeting our culture, such as, “You are
        making it difficult for us to explore the issue to the extent that we
        must in order to \_\_ (stated goal). I don’t think that is the effect
        you want. Was this the \_**\___\_ (stated goal) you are trying to
        achieve?

3.  Use mindfulness, note how you feel, don’t judge and then return to the present.

4.  Try to move the situation into a situation where both parties are open for a real
    dialog on problem-solving and learning.

**Culture and team plays**

Edward Deming, a key innovator in lean and ways of working has stated, “A bad
system will beat a good person every time.” Often, a culture of fear, and one
lacking psychological safety will trigger both the unwanted emotions and
behaviors found in the above internal and external plays. As we try to move
towards a generative culture, one in which, “failure causes inquiry”, “failures
are treated primarily as opportunities to improve the system”, “Responsibilities
are shared”, and “Messengers are not punished when they deliver news of a
failure,” we must remember that systems and processes can also reinforce the
behaviors we want to change.

The plays below assume a few things:

1.  We must always assume we’re working with the best of intentions

2.  While we may not have complete control, we can impact the systems and
    culture around us.

Some things or actions to consider:

1.  What is our current team culture and how do we hold each other accountable
    to achieving the culture we want?

2.  Creating a systems thinking model may be useful here to also depict why our
    culture is not accepting of failure. What types of failure do we experience, and
    how do we deal with each one. Failure can be in routine work, complex work,
    and discovery work. How do we deal with each? Is there a general pervasive
    theme? One typical response is often that it is a culture of fear and or blame 
    resposible for .

3.  Watch this [video](https://youtu.be/ZXXaCCbpNYw?t=121) on continuous
    improvement. Some key tips include:

    1.  Don’t do a root cause analysis, one fix won’t solve everything (linear
        thinking in a non-linear world)

    2.  Think no such thing as “human error.” How do we better design the
        system.

    3.  Read this [summary](https://aws.amazon.com/message/41926/) on the Amazon
        S3 disruption. Even though the issue was triggered by a single
        individual, look at how the team used this as a learning opportunity.
        Compare that to Equifax’s CEO blaming a [lone
        employee.](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/03/business/equifax-congress-data-breach.html)
        Ask yourself and your team, which environment would you like to work in
        (and fail in)?

4.  Examine your teams processes, are the incentives aligned with the culture
    that we want to achieve? Does the team think in terms of root causes or in
    terms of learning opportunities?

5.  Do you use the “Andon cord” concept, where anyone can call attention to a
    failure, and initiate a group swarming tactic?

6.  How does your team try to create resiliency (within each other and within
    systems)? Do you actively seek out failures, and treasure them as learning
    opportunities? Advanced techniques like the chaos monkey, gameday planned
    failures, and other activities bring along a mindset that failure is the
    chance to learn and create resiliency.

Best of luck with learning to deal with failure. I know you will achieve
greatness as you learn from these!

Here is an additional resource:

<https://hbr.org/2011/04/strategies-for-learning-from-failure>
